
# ISAM to SQL Replication via I/O Hooks

This repository contains an example of how to implement the replication of a Synergy applications ISAM data to a
relational database in near-to-real-time.

The techniques demonstrated in this example are based in large part on code that is automatically generated using
CodeGen. It is therefore a requirement that the data structures and files that are to be replicated, including key
definitions, are acurately described in a Synergy repository.

Once the bulk of the code that is required to achieve the replication of data has been generated, the underlying
application is modified by the addition of an I/O hooks object to any channels that are opened for update to
files that are to be replicated. If your application already uses one or more subroutines to open its data files
then those subroutines will be the only places that you need to alter, and the required change will typically be
the addition of just a few lines of code to those routines. The code in the generated I/O hooks class detects and
records changes to the ISAM files that are being replicated.

Once this change information is being recorded a single process called the "replicator" is used to cause those
changes to be mirrored to corresponding tables in the relational database.

There are several advantages to taking this kind of approach, some of the major ones being:

* You don't need to re-design your Synergy applications to store the actual application data in an SQL database.
  To do this properly would be a very major re-write of any application.

* You don't put the overhead of writing the data to both ISAM and SQL Server into your actual user applications,
  the performance overhead of which would be very significant.

* You don't make your user applications directly dependent on the database being started. If the database, or
  replication server are not started then the transactions will simply build up in the log file until such time
  as they are started.

Following the code in this examples will mean that you can implement data replication with only minimal changes
to the original Synergy applications. This is not a project that will happen overnight. In order to be successful
with this type of project, the major requirements are:

* Each of the ISAM files that you wish to replicate to the database must have at least one unique key.

* If you have any data files that do not already have at least one unique key then you will need to add a new
  field and unique key in order to replicate the data from that file to a relational database.

* You will need to add a couple of lines of code after each OPEN statement that opens your ISAM data files for update.

***

## Requirements

This example was originally created using Synergy/DE V10.3.3 on a Windows system and should work on any higher
version. The example software should also work on UNIX and OpenVMS, although some environment setup would be
required. The database used during testing was Microsoft SQL Server 2014 and the code should work with any
later version of SQL Server, and some earlier versions also.

***

## Development Environment

Use workbench and open the Workspace SQLReplicaitonIoHooks.vpw, or use Visual Studio to open the
SqlReplicationIoHools solution. Both contain several projects, as follows:

### Application Project

Contains a UI Toolkit application that includes an employee maintenance function. The replicator program can also
be started, stopped and controlled via menu items in the sample application.

### Library Project

Contains subroutines, functions and classes that are used both by the UI Toolkit application, and by the replicator
program. Note that the main code used to interact with ISAM files (EmployeeIO.dbl) and the relational database
(EmployeeSqlIO.dbl) are in this library. These files, and others, were code-generated by using CodeGen.

### Replicator Project

Contains the replicator program as well as several utility programs.

***

## Setup

If you wish to actually configure and execute this demo you will need:

* A Synergy/DE development environment (V10.3.3 or higher) on Windows

* If you wish to use Visual Studio then you must have Visual Studio 2015 (or higher) and have Synergy DBL
  Integration for Visual Studio installed.

* A SQL Server 2014 (or higher) database and at least one Synergy/DE SQL Connection license available. If you
  wish to avoid editing the supplied example code then use a SQL Server database on the same computer that you
  intend to run the Synergy code on, and make sure that database is configured to accept Windows Authentication.
  If you do not use a local database then you will need change the value of the REPLICATOR_DATABASE environment
  variable that is defined in the project properties of the application.vpj project.

* Create a new SQL Server database and make sure that the account that you will be using to connect to the
  database server has access to the new database. If you wish to avoid editing the supplied example code then
  name the database "SqlReplicationIoHooks". If you do not use this default database name then you will need
  to change the value of the REPLICATOR_DATABASE environment variable that is defined in the project properties
  of the Workbench application.vpj project, or within the Common Properties settings of the Visual Studio solution.

* You will find a batch file named setup.bat in the root folder. Execute it one time to load the repository
  schema into a repository database and create various ISAM files required by the demo environment.

## Building the Code in Workbench

* Start Workbench and open the workspace called SQLReplicaitonIoHooks.vpw. Use the "Project > Open Workspace..."
  menu option to do this.  Make sure you can see the "Projects" window.  If it is not active then make it
  active, if it is not displayed then display it by selecting "View -> Toolbars" from the menu and checking the
  "Projects" option.
* Right-click on the library.vpj project and select "Set Active Project"
* From the main menu, select "Build > Build" to build the library project
* Right-click on the replicator.vpj project and select "Set Active Project"
* From the main menu select "Build > Build" to build the replicator program.
* Right-click on the application.vpj project and select "Set Active Project"
* From the main menu select "Build > Build" to build the main application
* Right-click on the application.vpj project and select "Compile Scripts Setup..."
* Change the "Window Library" file spec so that the path to the EXE\tkapp.ism file is correct for your system, then click the OK button.
* Right-click on the application.vpj project and select "Compile Scripts" to compile the UI Toolkit window library (creates EXE\tkapp.ism)

## Building the Code in Visual Studio

* Start Visual Studio and open the solution called SQLReplicaitonIoHooks.sln. 
* From the Build menu, select "Rebuild Solution".

## Preparing the Database

The code in this example is configured for use with a local default instance of a recent version of Microsoft SQL
Server (Express edition is OK) that is configured to accept Windows authentication. The only database preparation
that is necessary is to create an empty database named "SqlReplicationIoHooks".

If your SQL Server database is not local, or does not accept Windows authentication, you will need to change the
value of the REPLICATOR_DATABASE environment variable that is defined in the project properties of the
application.vpj project. Refer to the section on configuring connect strings in the Synergy/DE SQL Connection API
manual for more details.

***

## Configuration Options

The replicator process can be configured either via command line parameters or by setting environment variables.
In all cases the command line parameters will override the equivalent environment variables.

### Command Line Parameters

| Parameter                           | Description   |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------- |
| -database <connect_string>          | SQL connection connect string identifying the database to connect to. |
| -logdir <directory>                 | The location where the log file should be created. A full or relative path, or an environment variable followed by a colon. |
| -interval <seconds>                 | The number of seconds the replicator should sleep if it finds no instructions to process. |
| -verbose                            | Enable verbose logging. |
| -keyvalues                          | Record the key values being used to relate ISAM records to SQL rows. |
| -loaderrors                         | Log failing records during a bulk load operation to a file. |
| -exportdir <directory>              | The location where bulk export files will be created. |
| -erroremail <email_address>         | The email address that start, error and stop messages should be sent TO. |
| -mailfrom <email_address>           | The email address that replicator messages should be sent FROM. |
| -maildomain <domain_name>           | The domain associated with the sender email address (e.g. synergex.com).|
| -stoponerror                        | Set to YES to cause the replicator to stop if an error is encountered. |
| -mailserver <smtp_server>           | The DNS name or IP address of the SMTP mail server that will be used to send messages. |
| -instance <name>                    | The name of this replicator instance. |

### Environment Variables

| Environment Variable                | Description                                                                                                                 |
| ----------------------------------- | -------------                                                                                                               |
| REPLICATOR_DATABASE                 | SQL connection database connection string identifying the SQL Server database to connect to.                                |
| REPLICATOR_LOGDIR                   | The location where the log file should be created. A full or relative path, or an environment variable followed by a colon. |
| REPLICATOR_INTERVAL                 | The number of seconds the replicator should sleep if it finds no instructions to process.                                   |
| REPLICATOR_FULL_LOG                 | Set to YES to cause more verbose logging to be used.                                                                        |
| REPLICATOR_LOG_KEYS                 | Set to YES to cause the key values being used to relate ISAM records to SQL rows.                                           |
| REPLICATOR_LOG_BULK_LOAD_EXCEPTIONS | Set to YES to cause failing records during a bulk load operation to be logged to a file.                                    |
| REPLICATOR_EXPORT                   | The location where buld export files will be created.                                                                       |
| REPLICATOR_ERROR_EMAIL              | The email address that start, error and stop messages should be sent TO.                                                    |
| REPLICATOR_EMAIL_SENDER             | The email address that replicator messages should be sent FROM.                                                             |
| REPLICATOR_EMAIL_DOMAIN             | The domain associated with the sender email address (e.g. synergex.com).                                                    |
| REPLICATOR_ERROR_STOP               | Set to YES to cause the replicator to stop if an error is encountered.                                                      |
| REPLICATOR_SMTP_SERVER              | The DNS name or IP address of the SMTP mail server that will be used to send messages.                                      |
| REPLICATOR_INSTANCE                 | The name of this replicator instance.                                                                                       |

***

## Running the Demo

In order to see the replication happenning use SQL Server Management Studio to connect to the SqlReplicationIoHooks
database and display the list of tables in the database - there aren't any at the moment. Run the Synergy client
application by ensuring that application.vpj is the current project, and then selecting "Build > Execute" from the
Workbench menu.

Start the replicator process by selecting select "Replicator -> Start Replicator" from the application menu. You should
see some messages, including:

    SQL Replicator Log
    Sleep interval is 2 seconds
    --- Processing instructions ------------------

Next pick "Applications -> Employee Maintenance", then cick on the search button to show a list of all of the employees
in the ISAM file.  Double click an employee to edit it, then change something and click OK.

This will record an update operation in the replication servers transaction log. Within a few seconds it should pick up
the entry, realize there is an update to the database, and try to replicate the change. The first time this happens it
will realize that the EMPLOYEE table doesn't exist in the database as yet, so it should create the table, and then
initiate a full load of the table from the ISAM file.

Check Management studio, is the table and data there yet?  If not then you probably got error messages from the replicator
and need to debug the environment.

From now on, as you create, amend and delete employee records, those changes should be replicated to the EMPLOYEE table
in SQL server. The example replicator goes to sleep for five seconds if there is nothing to do, so you should see any
changes within that time frame. If you are sitting looking at the table in Management studio however, the table is not
automatically refreshed, you you'll have to refresh it manually each time you want to see a change.

The replicator process would generally be run as a Windows service or detached process, and can be controlled by putting
"instructions" into it's ISAM file. There are various options on the "Replicator" menu to do this. For example, to stop
the replicator, select "Replicator -> Stop Replicator".

***

## Running Replicator as a Windows Service

The replicator program can be registered and started as a Windows Service, via the dbssvc.exe service runtime. An example
of doing so can be round in the batch file RegisterReplicatorService.bat, and an example of un-registering the service
can be found in UnregisterReplicatorService.bat.

Once registered the service may be stopped and started via the Windows Services application or via shell conmmands, e.g.:

    net start SynergyReplicator
    net stop SynergyReplicator

The connect string used in the example command assumes a SQL server database named SqlReplicationIoHooks running on the
local system, and Windows Authentication is used to authenticate the user. The service that is registered by dbssvc will
run under the context of the Local System account, so you must authorize that account to access the SQL Server database.
To do this, use SQL Server Enterprise Manager:

1. Go to Secutiry / Logins
2. Right-click NT AUTHORITY\SYSTEM and select Properties
3. Go to "User Mapping" and check the Map checkbox next to your database, and then check the "db_owner" role.
4. Click OK to save the change

You must also ensure that the EXE logical name is specified in a way that it is available to the replicator when it
runs under the contect of the Local System account. There are a copuple of ways of doing that:

1. Use the Windows System Properties dialog to set EXE as an actual system wide environment variable.
2. Set the value in the [replicator] section of your synergy.ini file.=, like this:

    [replicator]

	EXE=C:\path\to\replicator\exe

#### IMPORTANT Note
Due to a bug in the 10.3.3c and earlier versions of the dbssvc.exe runtime, related to the maximum length of a windows
command line, if you wish to register replicator as a windows service in conjunction with useing the command-line
configuration options to configure the replicator service, you must be running Synergy 10.3.3c with the HotFix
(from Synergex support) dated July 31st 2017 or later, or a later version of Synergy/DE. As an alternative, use the
environment variables method of configuring the service (in synergy.ini as shown above).

***

Enjoy!

Author: Steve Ives, Synergex Professional Services Group (steve.ives@synergex.com)
